(DOCSP-27664) Update top Data API landing to reflect new positioning / frontend access (#337)
mongodb/docs-app-services: source/data-api.txt

>    Custom HTTPS Endpoints </data-api/custom-endpoints>

Reviewer: this page is an excellent product overview!

   Authenticate Data API Requests </data-api/authenticate>
   Data API Examples </data-api/examples>
   Data Formats </data-api/data-formats>

.. contents:: On this page
   :depth: 2

The Data API is a managed service that lets you securely work with
data stored in Atlas using standard HTTPS requests. You can use the Data
API to connect to MongoDB Atlas from any platform that supports HTTPS,
including:

- Web browsers
- Servers
- CI/CD pipelines
- Serverless & Edge compute environments
- Mobile applications
- Internet-Of-Things devices

> The Data API is not a direct connection to your database. Instead, the

Reviewer 2: Nit: I think this might help set the stage better either combined with the first sentence or as a second sentence.  Feels like we're splitting the definition in two here.

API is a fully-managed middleware service that sits between your cluster
and the clients that send requests.

You don't need to install any database drivers or opinionated libraries

> to work with the Data API. Instead, you send standard requests like the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to work with the Data API. Instead, you send standard HTTPS requests like the
```

following:

.. io-code-block::
   
   .. input::
      :language: bash

      curl -X POST \
        https://data.mongodb-api.com/app/myapp-abcde/endpoint/data/v1/action/insertOne \
        -H 'apiKey: <API Key>' \
        -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
        -d '{
          "dataSource": "mongodb-atlas",
          "database": "learn-data-api",
          "collection": "hello",
          "document": {
            "text": "Hello, World!",
          }
        }'

   .. output::
      :language: json

      { "insertedId": "63dc56ac74ddb86ed3eb8474" }

Endpoints

> ---------

Reviewer: i don't think it's smthn to address in this PR, but i find it kinda funny that we're calling both generated endpoints and custom endpoints 'the data api', but then also the generated endpoints are called 'the data api'.

probably this is smthn that extends to product/product marketing. but worth bringing up imo.

curious your thoughts.

Author: Yeah it's silly IMO but that's what we're calling them for now. I have some ideas on how we could be clearer that I've brought up with Sumedha but I'll reintroduce them with PM again.

   operation based on your endpoint authorization scheme.

3. **Runs the requested operation.** This might involve reading or
   writing data in Atlas with a generated endpoint or invoke a custom
   function that you wrote.

   For requests that read or write data in Atlas, the Data API also
   enforces the access control rules and document schemas defined in
   your App. This means that users can only access data they're allowed
   to read and write. Requests fail if they include an invalid write
   operation.

4. **Returns an HTTPS response to the caller.** The response includes
   the result of a generated endpoint operation or any data that you
   return from a custom endpoint. Requests can choose to receive the
   response in either :ref:`JSON or EJSON format
   <data-api-data-formats>`.

When to Use the Data API
------------------------

We recommend using the Data API when:

- You want to run MongoDB operations from a web application or other
  client that you can't trust.

- You can't or don't want to manage a MongoDB driver in your server-side
  environment. For example, some edge compute environments don't support
  database drivers or connection pooling.

> - You want to integrate Atlas data access into a federated API gateway

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You want to integrate Atlas data access into a federated API gateway.
```

- You want to connect to App Services from an environment not currently

>   supported by a Realm SDK and don't want to use a driver to connect

Reviewer: ref to realm sdks landing page here? https://www.mongodb.com/docs/realm/

tho on reading the landing page, it really positions realm as a mobile DB, rather than a mobile DB + client to access App Services, so reader might be confused if they're not familiar w realm and wind up there, so 🤷 

curious your thoughts here. 

obvi out of scope for this PR, but maybe we should have a page about realm on the App Services docs explaining what Realm SDKs are, and how they related to App Services.

Author: > on reading the landing page, it really positions realm as a mobile DB, rather than a mobile DB + client to access App Services, so reader might be confused if they're not familiar w realm and wind up there

Link could be helpful. I think the paragraph that linked them there has enough context that some/most SDKs have an App Services integration.

> obvi out of scope for this PR, but maybe we should have a page about realm on the App Services docs explaining what Realm SDKs are, and how they related to App Services

Agreed - I thought we at least had this on the introduction page but we don't even really have it there, just a couple mentions of the SDKs in broader contexts.

  over the :ref:`wire protocol <wire-protocol>`.

> An operation called through a Data API endpoint will likely take longer

Reviewer 2: I would like us to be more specific here and add above the bulleted list.  Something along the lines of "Using the MongoDB Drivers to build on top of Atlas is still the general recommended approach (especially when connecting from a Server) as it will be more performant and flexible."

than the corresponding MongoDB operation called through a connected
MongoDB Driver. For high-load use-cases and latency sensitive
applications, we recommend connecting directly to your database with a
MongoDB driver. To learn more, visit the :driver:`MongoDB Drivers

> </data-api-data-formats>` documentation.

Reviewer: just noticed this link is broken. fix before merge.

> </data-api-data-formats>` documentation.

Reviewer 2: Another bullet that we might consider adding to this list – 

- "You are looking to create a new feature and would prefer starting your development on the client side and then moving to create / refine the API layer when your requirements are refined."

  :ref:`Data API Endpoints <data-api-endpoints>`.

> - **Custom Endpoints** are app-specific API routes handled by functions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Custom Endpoints** are app-specific API routes handled by Atlas Functions
```

  that you write. You can use custom endpoints to define operations that
  fit your use case specifically. For example, you could create an
  endpoint that runs a pre-defined aggregation or that integrates with
  an external webhook service.

  To learn more, including how to create and call endpoints, see
  :ref:`Custom HTTPS Endpoints <custom-endpoints>`.

How the Data API Works
----------------------

Data API requests may resemble traditional database operations, like
``find`` or ``insertOne``, but the Data API is not a direct connection
to your database. Instead, the Data API adds additional authentication,
authorization, and correctness checks to ensure that your data is only
accessed or modified in the ways you allow. This allows you to safely

> access data in Atlas from unsafe clients like web apps.

Reviewer: to call web apps 'unsafe' rings a little funky to me.

i wonder if there's a better word that we could use here. perhaps smthn like: 

```suggestion
access data in Atlas from potentially vulnerable clients like web apps.
```

(got that suggestion w help of chat gpt 😉)

For each incoming request, the Data API:

1. **Authenticates the calling user.** This might involve validating an
   access token, logging in with header credentials, or directly
   assigning a specific runtime user based on your configuration.

2. **Authorizes the request.** This ensures that the user sent a
   well-formed request and has permission to perform the requested
   operation based on your endpoint authorization scheme.

3. **Runs the requested operation.** This might involve reading or
   writing data in Atlas with a generated endpoint or invoke a custom
   function that you wrote.

   For requests that read or write data in Atlas, the Data API also
   enforces the access control rules and document schemas defined in

>    your App. This means that users can only access data they're allowed
>    to read and that requests will fail if they include an invalid write

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   your App. This means that users can only access data they're allowed
   to read and write. Requests fail if they include an invalid write
```

   operation.

4. **Returns an HTTPS response to the caller.** The response includes
   the result of a generated endpoint operation or any data that you

>    return from a custom endpoint. Requests can choose to receive the
>    response in either :ref:`JSON or EJSON format
>    <data-api-data-formats>`.

Reviewer: the last sentence reads a little funny to me b/c it seems to assign agency to the request. consider rephrase to assign agency to developer: 

```suggestion
   return from a custom endpoint. In the request, you can choose to receive the
   response in either :ref:`JSON or EJSON format
   <data-api-data-formats>`.
```
